
3.2. Advanced Kernel Programming

This chapter will first take a deeper dive into the hardware model of NVIDIA GPUs, and then introduce some of the more advanced features available in CUDA kernel code aimed at improving kernel performance. This chapter will introduce some concepts related to thread scopes, asynchronous execution, and the associated synchronization primitives. These conceptual discussions provide a necessary foundation for some of the advanced performance features available within kernel code.

Detailed descriptions for some of these features are contained in chapters dedicated to the features in the next part of this programming guide.

    Advanced synchronization primitives introduced in this chapter, are covered completely in Section 4.9 and Section 4.10.

    Asynchronous data copies, including the tensor memory accelerator (TMA), are introduced in this chapter and covered completely in Section 4.11.

3.2.1. Using PTX

Parallel Thread Execution (PTX), the virtual machine instruction set architecture (ISA) that CUDA uses to abstract hardware ISAs, was introduced in Section 1.3.3. Writing code in PTX directly is a highly advanced optimization technique that is not necessary for most developers and should be considered a tool of last resort. Nevertheless, there are situations where the fine-grained control enabled by writing PTX directly enables performance improvements in specific applications. These situations are typically in very performance-sensitive portions of an application where every fraction of a percent of performance improvement has significant benefits. All of the available PTX instructions are in the PTX ISA document.

cuda::ptx namespace

One way to use PTX directly in your code is to use the cuda::ptx namespace from libcu++. This namespace provides C++ functions that map directly to PTX instructions, simplifying their use within a C++ application. For more information, please refer to the cuda::ptx namespace documentation.

Inline PTX

Another way to include PTX in your code is to use inline PTX. This method is described in detail in the corresponding documentation. This is very similar to writing assembly code on a CPU.

3.2.2. Hardware Implementation

A streaming multiprocessor or SM (see GPU Hardware Model) is designed to execute hundreds of threads concurrently. To manage such a large number of threads, it employs a unique parallel computing model called Single-Instruction, Multiple-Thread, or SIMT, that is described in SIMT Execution Model. The instructions are pipelined, leveraging instruction-level parallelism within a single thread, as well as extensive thread-level parallelism through simultaneous hardware multithreading as detailed in Hardware Multithreading. Unlike CPU cores, SMs issue instructions in order and do not perform branch prediction or speculative execution.

Sections SIMT Execution Model and Hardware Multithreading describe the architectural features of the SM that are common to all devices. Section Compute Capabilities provides the specifics for devices of different compute capabilities.

The NVIDIA GPU architecture uses a little-endian representation.

3.2.2.1. SIMT Execution Model

Each SM creates, manages, schedules, and executes threads in groups of 32 parallel threads called warps. Individual threads composing a warp start together at the same program address, but they have their own instruction address counter and register state and are therefore free to branch and execute independently. The term warp originates from weaving, the first parallel thread technology. A half-warp is either the first or second half of a warp. A quarter-warp is either the first, second, third, or fourth quarter of a warp.

A warp executes one common instruction at a time, so full efficiency is realized when all 32 threads of a warp agree on their execution path. If threads of a warp diverge via a data-dependent conditional branch, the warp executes each branch path taken, disabling threads that are not on that path. Branch divergence occurs only within a warp; different warps execute independently regardless of whether they are executing common or disjoint code paths.

The SIMT architecture is akin to SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) vector organizations in that a single instruction controls multiple processing elements. A key difference is that SIMD vector organizations expose the SIMD width to the software, whereas SIMT instructions specify the execution and branching behavior of a single thread. In contrast with SIMD vector machines, SIMT enables programmers to write thread-level parallel code for independent, scalar threads, as well as data-parallel code for coordinated threads. For the purposes of correctness, the programmer can essentially ignore the SIMT behavior; however, substantial performance improvements can be realized by taking care that the code seldom requires threads in a warp to diverge. In practice, this is analogous to the role of cache lines: the cache line size can be safely ignored when designing for correctness but must be considered in the code structure when designing for peak performance. Vector architectures, on the other hand, require the software to coalesce loads into vectors and manage divergence manually.

3.2.2.1.1. Independent Thread Scheduling

On GPUs with compute capability lower than 7.0, warps used a single program counter shared amongst all 32 threads in the warp together with an active mask specifying the active threads of the warp. As a result, threads from the same warp in divergent regions or different states of execution cannot signal each other or exchange data, and algorithms requiring fine-grained sharing of data guarded by locks or mutexes can lead to deadlock, depending on which warp the contending threads come from.

In GPUs of compute capability 7.0 and later, independent thread scheduling allows full concurrency between threads, regardless of warp. With independent thread scheduling, the GPU maintains execution state per thread, including a program counter and call stack, and can yield execution at a per-thread granularity, either to make better use of execution resources or to allow one thread to wait for data to be produced by another. A schedule optimizer determines how to group active threads from the same warp together into SIMT units. This retains the high throughput of SIMT execution as in prior NVIDIA GPUs, but with much more flexibility: threads can now diverge and reconverge at sub-warp granularity.

Independent thread scheduling can break code that relies on implicit warp-synchronous behavior from previous GPU architectures. Warp-synchronous code assumes that threads in the same warp execute in lockstep at every instruction, but the ability for threads to diverge and reconverge at sub-warp granularity makes such assumptions invalid. This can lead to a different set of threads participating in the executed code than intended. Any warp-synchronous code developed for GPUs prior to CC 7.0 (such as synchronization-free intra-warp reductions) should be revisited to ensure compatibility. Developers should explicitly synchronize such code using __syncwarp() to ensure correct behavior across all GPU generations.

Note

The threads of a warp that are participating in the current instruction are called the active threads, whereas threads not on the current instruction are inactive (disabled). Threads can be inactive for a variety of reasons including having exited earlier than other threads of their warp, having taken a different branch path than the branch path currently executed by the warp, or being the last threads of a block whose number of threads is not a multiple of the warp size.

If a non-atomic instruction executed by a warp writes to the same location in global or shared memory from more than one of the threads of the warp, the number of serialized writes that occur to that location may vary depending on the compute capability of the device. However, for all compute capabilities, which thread performs the final write is undefined.

If an atomic instruction executed by a warp reads, modifies, and writes to the same location in global memory for more than one of the threads of the warp, each read/modify/write to that location occurs and they are all serialized, but the order in which they occur is undefined.

... (continues exactly as provided, unchanged)