CuTe Documentation

TITLE: Getting Started With CuTe

Getting Started With CuTe

CuTe is a collection of C++ CUDA template abstractions for defining and operating on hierarchically multidimensional layouts of threads and data. CuTe provides Layout and Tensor objects that compactly packages the type, shape, memory space, and layout of data, while performing the complicated indexing for the user. This lets programmers focus on the logical descriptions of their algorithms while CuTe does the mechanical bookkeeping for them. With these tools, we can quickly design, implement, and modify all dense linear algebra operations.

The core abstraction of CuTe are the hierarchically multidimensional layouts which can be composed with data arrays to represent tensors. The representation of layouts is powerful enough to represent nearly everything we need to implement efficient dense linear algebra. Layouts can also be combined and manipulated via functional composition, on which we build a large set of common operations such as tiling and partitioning.


Library Organization

CuTe is a header-only C++ library, so there is no source code that needs building. Library headers are contained within the top level include/cute directory, with components of the library grouped by directories that represent their semantics.


Directory and Contents:


include/cute: Each header in the top level corresponds to one of the fundamental building blocks of CuTe, such as Layout and Tensor.


include/cute/container: Implementations of STL-like objects, such as tuple, array, and aligned array.


include/cute/numeric: Fundamental numeric data types that include nonstandard floating-point types, nonstandard integer types, complex numbers, and integer sequence.


include/cute/algorithm: Implementations of utility algorithms such as copy, fill, and clear that automatically leverage architecture-specific features if available.


include/cute/arch: Wrappers for architecture-specific matrix-matrix multiply and copy instructions.


include/cute/atom: Meta-information for instructions in arch and utilities like partitioning and tiling.


Quick Tips

How do I print CuTe objects on host or device?

The cute::print function has overloads for almost all CuTe types, including Pointers, Integers, Strides, Shapes, Layouts, and Tensors. When in doubt, try calling print on it.

CuTe’s print functions work on either host or device. Note that on device, printing is expensive. Even just leaving print code in place on device, even if it is never called (e.g., printing in an if branch that is not taken at run time), may generate slower code. Thus, be sure to remove code that prints on device after debugging.

You might also only want to print on thread 0 of each threadblock, or threadblock 0 of the grid. The thread0() function returns true only for global thread 0 of the kernel, that is, for thread 0 of threadblock 0. A common idiom for printing CuTe objects to print only on global thread 0.


if (thread0()) {
  print(some_cute_object);
}


Some algorithms depend on some thread or threadblock, so you may need to print on threads or threadblocks other than zero. The header file cute/util/debug.hpp, among other utilities, includes the function bool thread(int tid, int bid) that returns true if running on thread tid and threadblock bid.


Other output formats

Some CuTe types have special printing functions that use a different output format.

The cute::print_layout function will display any rank-2 layout in a plain text table. This is excellent for visualizing the map from coordinates to indices.

The cute::print_tensor function will display any rank-1, rank-2, rank-3, or rank-4 tensor in a plain text multidimensional table. The values of the tensor are printed so you can verify the tile of data is what you expect after a copy, for example.

The cute::print_latex function will print LaTeX commands that you can use to build a nicely formatted and colored tables via pdflatex. This work for Layout, TiledCopy, and TiledMMA, which can be very useful to get a sense of layout patterns and partitioning patterns within CuTe.