8.1. Overall Performance Optimization Strategies

Performance optimization revolves around four basic strategies:

    Maximize parallel execution to achieve maximum utilization;

    Optimize memory usage to achieve maximum memory throughput;

    Optimize instruction usage to achieve maximum instruction throughput;

    Minimize memory thrashing.

Which strategies will yield the best performance gain for a particular portion of an application depends on the performance limiters for that portion; optimizing instruction usage of a kernel that is mostly limited by memory accesses will not yield any significant performance gain, for example. Optimization efforts should therefore be constantly directed by measuring and monitoring the performance limiters, for example using the CUDA profiler. Also, comparing the floating-point operation throughput or memory throughput—whichever makes more sense—of a particular kernel to the corresponding peak theoretical throughput of the device indicates how much room for improvement there is for the kernel.
8.2. Maximize Utilization

To maximize utilization the application should be structured in a way that it exposes as much parallelism as possible and efficiently maps this parallelism to the various components of the system to keep them busy most of the time.
8.2.1. Application Level

At a high level, the application should maximize parallel execution between the host, the devices, and the bus connecting the host to the devices, by using asynchronous functions calls and streams as described in Asynchronous Concurrent Execution. It should assign to each processor the type of work it does best: serial workloads to the host; parallel workloads to the devices.

For the parallel workloads, at points in the algorithm where parallelism is broken because some threads need to synchronize in order to share data with each other, there are two cases: Either these threads belong to the same block, in which case they should use __syncthreads() and share data through shared memory within the same kernel invocation, or they belong to different blocks, in which case they must share data through global memory using two separate kernel invocations, one for writing to and one for reading from global memory. The second case is much less optimal since it adds the overhead of extra kernel invocations and global memory traffic. Its occurrence should therefore be minimized by mapping the algorithm to the CUDA programming model in such a way that the computations that require inter-thread communication are performed within a single thread block as much as possible.
8.2.2. Device Level

At a lower level, the application should maximize parallel execution between the multiprocessors of a device.

Multiple kernels can execute concurrently on a device, so maximum utilization can also be achieved by using streams to enable enough kernels to execute concurrently as described in Asynchronous Concurrent Execution.
8.2.3. Multiprocessor Level

At an even lower level, the application should maximize parallel execution between the various functional units within a multiprocessor.

As described in Hardware Multithreading, a GPU multiprocessor primarily relies on thread-level parallelism to maximize utilization of its functional units. Utilization is therefore directly linked to the number of resident warps. At every instruction issue time, a warp scheduler selects an instruction that is ready to execute. This instruction can be another independent instruction of the same warp, exploiting instruction-level parallelism, or more commonly an instruction of another warp, exploiting thread-level parallelism. If a ready to execute instruction is selected it is issued to the active threads of the warp. The number of clock cycles it takes for a warp to be ready to execute its next instruction is called the latency, and full utilization is achieved when all warp schedulers always have some instruction to issue for some warp at every clock cycle during that latency period, or in other words, when latency is completely “hidden”. The number of instructions required to hide a latency of L clock cycles depends on the respective throughputs of these instructions (see the CUDA C++ Best Practices Guide for the throughputs of various arithmetic instructions). If we assume instructions with maximum throughput, it is equal to:

    4L for devices of compute capability 5.x, 6.1, 6.2, 7.x and 8.x since for these devices, a multiprocessor issues one instruction per warp over one clock cycle for four warps at a time, as mentioned in Compute Capabilities.

    2L for devices of compute capability 6.0 since for these devices, the two instructions issued every cycle are one instruction for two different warps.

The most common reason a warp is not ready to execute its next instruction is that the instruction’s input operands are not available yet.

If all input operands are registers, latency is caused by register dependencies, i.e., some of the input operands are written by some previous instruction(s) whose execution has not completed yet. In this case, the latency is equal to the execution time of the previous instruction and the warp schedulers must schedule instructions of other warps during that time. Execution time varies depending on the instruction. On devices of compute capability 7.x, for most arithmetic instructions, it is typically 4 clock cycles. This means that 16 active warps per multiprocessor (4 cycles, 4 warp schedulers) are required to hide arithmetic instruction latencies (assuming that warps execute instructions with maximum throughput, otherwise fewer warps are needed). If the individual warps exhibit instruction-level parallelism, i.e. have multiple independent instructions in their instruction stream, fewer warps are needed because multiple independent instructions from a single warp can be issued back to back.

If some input operand resides in off-chip memory, the latency is much higher: typically hundreds of clock cycles. The number of warps required to keep the warp schedulers busy during such high latency periods depends on the kernel code and its degree of instruction-level parallelism. In general, more warps are required if the ratio of the number of instructions with no off-chip memory operands (i.e., arithmetic instructions most of the time) to the number of instructions with off-chip memory operands is low (this ratio is commonly called the arithmetic intensity of the program).

Another reason a warp is not ready to execute its next instruction is that it is waiting at some memory fence (Memory Fence Functions) or synchronization point (Synchronization Functions). A synchronization point can force the multiprocessor to idle as more and more warps wait for other warps in the same block to complete execution of instructions prior to the synchronization point. Having multiple resident blocks per multiprocessor can help reduce idling in this case, as warps from different blocks do not need to wait for each other at synchronization points.